%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
% This is just an example/guide for you to refer to when submitting manuscripts to Frontiers, it is not mandatory to use Frontiers .cls files nor frontiers.tex  %
% This will only generate the Manuscript, the final article will be typeset by Frontiers after acceptance.
%                                              %
%                                                                                                                                                         %
% When submitting your files, remember to upload this *tex file, the pdf generated with it, the *bib file (if bibliography is not within the *tex) and all the figures.
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

%%% Version 3.4 Generated 2018/06/15 %%%
%%% You will need to have the following packages installed: datetime, fmtcount, etoolbox, fcprefix, which are normally inlcuded in WinEdt. %%%
%%% In http://www.ctan.org/ you can find the packages and how to install them, if necessary. %%%

\documentclass[utf8]{frontiersSCNS}

%\setcitestyle{square} % for Physics and Applied Mathematics and Statistics articles
\usepackage{url,hyperref,lineno,microtype,subcaption}
\usepackage[onehalfspacing]{setspace}

\linenumbers


% BELOW TAKEN FROM rticles plos template
%
% amsmath package, useful for mathematical formulas
\usepackage{amsmath}
% amssymb package, useful for mathematical symbols
\usepackage{amssymb}

% hyperref package, useful for hyperlinks
\usepackage{hyperref}

% graphicx package, useful for including eps and pdf graphics
% include graphics with the command \includegraphics
\usepackage{graphicx}

% Sweave(-like)
\usepackage{fancyvrb}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Sinput}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Soutput}{Verbatim}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Scode}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\newenvironment{Schunk}{}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{Code}{Verbatim}{}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{CodeInput}{Verbatim}{fontshape=sl}
\DefineVerbatimEnvironment{CodeOutput}{Verbatim}{}
\newenvironment{CodeChunk}{}{}

% cite package, to clean up citations in the main text. Do not remove.
\usepackage{cite}

\usepackage{color}

\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

% Below is from frontiers
%
\bibliographystyle{frontiersinSCNS}
% Use doublespacing - comment out for single spacing
%\usepackage{setspace}
%\doublespacing


% Leave a blank line between paragraphs instead of using \\


\def\keyFont{\fontsize{8}{11}\helveticabold }


%% ** EDIT HERE **
%% PLEASE INCLUDE ALL MACROS BELOW

%% END MACROS SECTION

% Pandoc citation processing
\newlength{\csllabelwidth}
\setlength{\csllabelwidth}{3em}
\newlength{\cslhangindent}
\setlength{\cslhangindent}{1.5em}
% for Pandoc 2.8 to 2.10.1
\newenvironment{cslreferences}%
  {}%
  {\par}
% For Pandoc 2.11+
\newenvironment{CSLReferences}[2] % #1 hanging-ident, #2 entry spacing
 {% don't indent paragraphs
  \setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
  % turn on hanging indent if param 1 is 1
  \ifodd #1 \everypar{\setlength{\hangindent}{\cslhangindent}}\ignorespaces\fi
  % set entry spacing
  \ifnum #2 > 0
  \setlength{\parskip}{#2\baselineskip}
  \fi
 }%
 {}
\usepackage{calc} % for calculating minipage widths
\newcommand{\CSLBlock}[1]{#1\hfill\break}
\newcommand{\CSLLeftMargin}[1]{\parbox[t]{\csllabelwidth}{#1}}
\newcommand{\CSLRightInline}[1]{\parbox[t]{\linewidth - \csllabelwidth}{#1}\break}
\newcommand{\CSLIndent}[1]{\hspace{\cslhangindent}#1}


\def\Authors{
  Maxwel C Oliveira\,\textsuperscript{1},
  Amit J Jhala\,\textsuperscript{2},
  Mark Bernards\,\textsuperscript{3},
  Chris Proctor\,\textsuperscript{2},
  Strahinja Stepanovic\,\textsuperscript{2},
  Rodrigo Werle\,\textsuperscript{1*}}

\def\Address{

  \textsuperscript{1} Department of Agronomy, University of
Wisconsin-Madison,  Madison,  Wisconsin,  United States
  
  \textsuperscript{2} Department of Agronomy and
Horticulture, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln,  Lincoln,  Nebraska,  United States
  
  \textsuperscript{3} Department of Agronomy, Western Illinois
University,  Macomb,  Illnois,  United States
  }

  
  \def\firstAuthorLast{Oliveira {et~al.}}
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  \def\corrAuthor{Rodrigo Werle}\def\corrAddress{Department of Agronomy,
University of Wisconsin-Madison, United States\\1575 Linden
Dr\\Madison, Wisconsin, 53705 United
States}\def\corrEmail{\href{mailto:rwerle@uwisc.edu}{\nolinkurl{rwerle@uwisc.edu}}}
  


\begin{document}
\onecolumn
\firstpage{1}

\title[Palmer amaranth adaptation]{Palmer amaranth (\emph{Amaranthus
palmeri}) adaptation to agroecossystems}
\author[\firstAuthorLast]{\Authors}
\address{} %This field will be automatically populated
\correspondance{} %This field will be automatically populated

\extraAuth{}% If there are more than 1 corresponding author, comment this line and uncomment the next one.
%\extraAuth{corresponding Author2 \\ Laboratory X2, Institute X2, Department X2, Organization X2, Street X2, City X2 , State XX2 (only USA, Canada and Australia), Zip Code2, X2 Country X2, email2@uni2.edu}


\maketitle

\begin{abstract}

Abstract length and content varies depending on article type. Refer to 
\url{http://www.frontiersin.org/about/AuthorGuidelines} for abstract requirement
and length according to article type.

%All article types: you may provide up to 8 keywords; at least 5 are mandatory.
\tiny
 \keyFont{ \section{Keywords:} Evolution Flowering Management Pigweed Weed} 

\end{abstract}

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section*{Introduction}\label{introduction}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Introduction}

Palmer amaranth (\emph{Amaranthus palmeri} S. Watson) is currently
considered one of the most economically damaged weed species to cropping
systems in the United States. Unmanaged Palmer amaranth in competition
for water, light and nutrients can drastically impact on crop yields
(Berger et al., 2015). For example, Palmer amaranth is documented with
potential to reduce 91\%, 68\%, and 54\% of corn (Massinga et al.,
2001), soybean (Klingaman and Oliver, 1994), and cotton (Morgan et al.,
2001) yields, respectively. Moreover, Palmer amaranth has showed a
remarkable capacity to evolve resistance to herbicides. To date, Palmer
amaranth has evolved resistance to eight herbicide sites of action
(Heap, 2021), increasing the weed management complexity (Lindsay et al.,
2017). Thus, Palmer amaranth poses an economical risk to sustainable
agriculture.

Palmer amaranth is a fast growing summer annual forb indigenous to
Sonoran Desert (Sauer, 1957). The species would eventually emerge as a
threat to US agriculture in the 1990s. Palmer amaranth weediness is
likely a result of human-assisted selection in combination with species
biology. Farm mechanization, conservation agriculture (e.g., no-till),
and reliance on herbicides for weed management are the main
human-mediated selection of Palmer amaranth into cropping systems (Ward
et al., 2013). On the other hand, Palmer amaranth is a prolific seed
producer with a C4 photosynthetic apparatus (Wang et al., 1992). With a
dioecy nature, Palmer amaranth male and female plants are obligate
outcrosser species, increasing the chances of exchanging adaptive traits
among plants (Oliveira et al., 2018). Also, Palmer amaranth small seed
size (e.g, 1 mm) tend to thrive in no-tillage systems (Price et al.,
2011), and spread across locations through farm equipment (Sauer, 1972),
manure (Hartzler and Anderson, 2016), animals (Farmer et al., 2017), and
plant propagules (Yu et al., 2021). The dispersal capacity of Palmer
amaranth make the species one of the most successful cases of weed
adaption to cropping systems.

Light and temperature are likely the main environment requirements for
Palmer amaranth successful grow and development. Palmer amaranth is
reported with an extended germination period (Jha et al., 2010).
Germination of Palmer amaranth is triggered by 18 C soil temperature
(Keeley et al., 1987), and optimal germination and biomass production
occur at 35/30 C day and night temperatures (Guo and Al-Khatib, 2003).
Also, Palmer amaranth germination are human-mediated by tillage timings
and preemergence-applied herbicides (Chahal et al., 2021). Water has not
shown to limit Palmer amaranth fitness. Under continuous water stress,
Palmer amaranth survived and produced at least 14000 seeds plant-1
(Chahal et al., 2018). Also, seeds from Palmer amaranth growing with
limited water conditions were heavier, less dormant, and prompt for
germination (Matzrafi et al., 2021). The continuous global temperature
warming can impact agriculture and promote niches for Palmer amaranth
invasion/adaptation into new environments. Currently, it is estimated
that the greatest climatic risk of Palmer amaranth establishment are
agronomic crops in Australia and Sub-Sahara Africa (Kistner and
Hatfield, 2018). Temperature is a key factor limiting Palmer amaranth
expansion to cooler geographies (Briscoe Runquist et al., 2019);
however, under future climate change Palmer amaranth is likely to expand
northward into Canada and Northern Europe (Kistner and Hatfield, 2018;
Briscoe Runquist et al., 2019).

Palmer amaranth is already found in agronomic crops of South America
(Larran et al., 2017; KÃ¼pper et al., 2017) and Southern Europe (Milani
et al., 2021). In the US, Palmer amaranth is well established at cotton
fields (Garetson et al., 2019) and non-crop areas (Bagavathiannan and
Norsworthy, 2016) in the southern United States but its range is
expanding northward. For example, herbicide resistant Palmer amaranth is
widespread in Nebraska (Oliveira et al., 2021), Michigan (Kohrt et al.,
2017), Connecticut (Aulakh et al., 2021), and potential damaged to
soybean fields in Illinois is reported (Davis et al., 2015). Successful
cases of Palmer amaranth invasion and near to eradication is documented
in Minnesota (Yu et al., 2021). No Palmer amaranth actively growing was
found in Canada; however, Palmer amaranth seeds was detected in sweet
potato slips (Page et al., 2021). Nonetheless, it seems fated the need
to manage Palmer amaranth in agronomic crops throughout multiple
environments in the near future. Strategies on Palmer amaranth
management should encompass the agroecosystem level but not only
attempts to eradicate the weed. Most tactics to manage Palmer amaranth
are based on technology fixes (Scott, 2011), which are short-term (e.g.,
herbicide and/or tillage) rather than long-term weed management. Palmer
amaranth management should be built on minimizing the species ability to
adapt, grow and develop into agroecossystems.

In the southeastern US, early growing Palmer amaranth is well known to
have higher impact on cotton yields than late established plants (MacRae
et al., 2013). In the northern states, Palmer amaranth impact on the
agroecossystem is recent. Studies investigating Palmer amaranth in those
locations is limited due to the plant classification as noxious weed (Yu
et al., 2021). Nonetheless, the continuous Palmer amaranth dispersal and
potential establishment across northern United States is concerning and
warrant investigations on species morphology in such environments.
Understanding Palmer amaranth biology and growing strategies under
different agroecossystems can enhance our knowledge on species
adaptation. It can also aid on designing proactive and ecological
tactics to limit the species range expansion, reduce its negative
impact, and design resilient and sustainable farming systems (MacLaren
et al., 2020). Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate
the flowering pattern, biomass production, and height of Palmer amaranth
growing under corn, soybean and fallow at two timings across five
locations in the United States Midwest.

\hypertarget{material-and-methods}{%
\section*{Material and Methods}\label{material-and-methods}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Material and Methods}

\hypertarget{plant-material-and-growing-conditions}{%
\subsection*{Plant material and growing
conditions}\label{plant-material-and-growing-conditions}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Plant material and growing conditions}

The study was performed with a \emph{A. palmeri} accession (Per1) from
Perkins County, Nebraska. Per1 accession collection is documented with
no reported herbicide resistance (Oliveira et al., 2021). Three weeks
prior to the field experiment, seeds were planted in plastic trays
containing potting-mix. Emerged seedlings (1 cm) were transplanted into
200 cm-3 plastic pots (a plant pot-1). Palmer amaranth seedlings were
supplied with adequate water and kept under greenhouse conditions at
Arlington, Clay Center, Lincoln, and Macomb; and kept outdoors in Grant.
Palmer amaranth seedlings were kept under greenhouse/outdoors until the
onset of the experiment (2-3 leaf stage/5 to 8 cm height).

\hypertarget{field-study}{%
\subsection*{Field study}\label{field-study}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Field study}

The experiment was conducted in 2018 and 2019 under field conditions at
five locations: Arlington (Washington County, Wisconsin), Clay Center
(Clay County, Nebraska), Grant (Perkins County, Nebraska), Lincoln
(Lancaster County, Nebraska), and Macomb (McDonough County, Illinois).

A glyphosate-resistant soybean cultivar (DSR-1950 R2Y at 296,400 seeds
ha 1), and a corn hybrid were planted at

Monthly mean air temperature and sum precipitation were obtained using
Daymet weather data from June through September across the five
locations in 2018 and 2019 (Correndo et al., 2021) (Figure 1)

The field experimental unit were six adjacent 9.1 m wide (12 rows at
72.2 cm row spacing) by 10.7 m long. Each experimental unit was planted
with corn or soybean (DSR-1950 R2Y at 296,400 seeds ha 1), or under
fallow condition. Palmer amaranth seedlings (potting mix + two
seedlings) were and gently transferring to the ground (6 cm deep and 8
cm wide). Twenty-four plants were equidistantly placed (0.76 m apart)
between rows within each agroecossystems. After a week, one was
eliminated and one was kept. There were two transplant timing: first
(June 1) and second (July 1). There were 24 Palmer amaranth plants in
each experimental unit, with a total of 144 plants for each location.
The study was repeated twice.

After transplanting, Palmer amaranth flowering was monitored until the
end of the study. When a plant started flowering, the day was recorded,
plant sex was identified as male or female, and plant height was
measured from soil surface to the plant top. Then, aboveground plant
biomass was harvest near soil surface and oven dried at 65 C until
reaching constant weight before the weight of biomass (g plant 1) was
recorded.

\hypertarget{statistical-analyses}{%
\subsection*{Statistical analyses}\label{statistical-analyses}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Statistical analyses}

The statistical analyses were performed using R statistical software
version 4.0.1. Data across locations and year were combined.

The cumulative Palmer amaranth flowering estimation was determined using
a asymmetrical three parameter log logistic Weibull model of the drc
package (Ritz et al., 2015).

\[Y(x) = 0 + (d-0) exp (-exp(b(log(x)-e)))\] In this model, \emph{Y} is
the Palmer amaranth cumulative flowering, \emph{d} is the upper limit
(set to 100), and \emph{e} is the XXX, and \emph{x} day of year (doy).

The doy for 10, 50, and 90\% Palmer amaranth cumulative flowering were
determined using the \emph{ED} function of drc package. Also, the 10,
50, and 90\% Palmer amaranth cumulative flowering were compared among
agroecossystems and timings using the \emph{EDcomp} function of drc
package. The EDcomp function compares the ratio of cumulative flowering
using t-statistics, where P-value \textless{} 0.05 indicates that we
fail to reject the null hypothesis.

Palmer amaranth height and biomass were performed with a linear mixed
model using \emph{lmer} function from ``lme4'' package (Bates et al.,
2015). Plant height and biomass were transformed to meet model
assumption of normality. In the model, agroecosystem (crop, soybean,
fallow) was the fixed effect and year nested with location the random
effects. Analysis of variance was performed with \emph{anova} function
from ``car'' package (Fox and Weisberg, 2018). Marginal means and
compact letter display were estimated with \emph{emmeans} and \emph{cld}
from packages ``emmeans'' and multcomp (Hothorn et al., 2008).

\hypertarget{results}{%
\section*{Results}\label{results}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Results}

\hypertarget{cumulative-flowering}{%
\subsection*{Cumulative flowering}\label{cumulative-flowering}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Cumulative flowering}

Palmer amaranth growing in corn resulted in a longer flowering pattern
compared to fallow and soybean at first cohort (Figure 2A). The 10\%
cumulative Palmer amaranth flowering in soybean, fallow and corn
occurred at the end of June. Palmer amaranth reached 10\% flowering in
soybean at doy 180, which was slightly different from fallow (doy 180.9;
\emph{P} = 0.01) and corn (doy 181.7; \emph{P} = 0.00). The 50\% Palmer
amaranth cumulative flowering occurred in July. For example, Palmer
amaranth reached 50\% in fallow at doy 193.4, followed by soybean (doy
194.8), corn (doy 206.6). Similar trend was observed at 90\% Palmer
amaranth cumulative flowering. Palmer amaranth growing in corn reached
90\% flowering at doy 252.6 (early September), which was 37.8 and 32.2
days after Palmer amaranth 90\% flowering in fallow and soybean,
respectively.

Palmer amaranth cumulative flowering at second cohort ranged from mid
July to mid September (Figure 2). All cumulative flowering comparisons
among agroecossystems were significant different (\emph{P} \textless{}
0.00) Palmer amaranth growing in fallow resulted in earlier flowering
time compared to soybean and corn. Palmer amaranth growing in fallow
reached 10\%, 50\%, and 90\% flowering time at day 203.8, 214.4, and
232.2, respectively. Palmer amaranth growing in soybean reached 10\%
flowering at doy 210.9, which was 6 days prior to corn (\emph{P}-value =
0.00). Similar trend was observed at 50\% flowering, whereas Palmer
amaranth reached 50\% flowering in corn (doy 233.0) 4 days after
soybeans (doy 228.9; \emph{P} = 0.00). The 90\% Palmer amaranth
cumulative flowering occurred at same day in corn (260.9) and soybean
(260.5; \emph{P} = 0.66).

\hypertarget{height-and-biomass}{%
\subsection*{Height and biomass}\label{height-and-biomass}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{Height and biomass}

Palmer amaranth accumulated more biomass when growing in fallow compared
to Palmer amaranth growing in soybean and corn (Figure 3A). At first
cohort time, Palmer amaranth biomass was 78.3 g plant-1, 26.4 g plant-1
and 14.9 g plant-1 in fallow, soybean and corn, respectively. Moreover,
Palmer amaranth produce less biomass at cohort time. Palmer amaranth
growing in fallow resulted in 49.2 g plant-1, 3.4 g plant-1 in soybean
and 1.4 g plant when growing in corn.

The Palmer amaranth achieve 92.3 cm tall when growing at first cohort
timing in corn (Figure 3B).

\hypertarget{discussion}{%
\section*{Discussion}\label{discussion}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Discussion}

Our study showed that Palmer amaranth flowering time, biomass and height
varied within agroecossystems and cohort timing. In general, Palmer
amaranth produced more biomass and taller plants when growing at first
cohort rather than second cohort. At first cohort, resources (e.g., soil
nutrients) and conditions (e.g., light) were more timely available for
both species, crop and weed. High biomass and taller Palmer amaranth
plants is likely a weed strategy to compete for light in between crop
rows in absence of canopy. In such condition, Palmer amaranth showed an
extraordinary plasticity to adapt upon the agroecosystem. This is
evident when comparing Palmer amaranth shape, and its extended flowering
pattern when growing into corn compared to soybean. In corn, Palmer
amaranth was taller and thinner when growing in corn. The Palmer
amaranth competition strategy was likely to mimic the crop grow and
development (Figure 4). These results are concerning as breeding more
competitive crop varieties is likely to select more competitive Palmer
amaranth biotypes (Bravo et al., 2017).

Palmer amaranth grow and development at second cohort was limited due to
the crop competitive ability at advanced development stages. Palmer
amaranth was transplanted when corn canopy was nearly closed, which
reduced Palmer amaranth competitiveness. As a result, Palmer amaranth
height and biomass was lower compared to its first cohort. Under crop
canopy, Palmer amaranth flowering pattern was near to similar into corn
and soybean. Palmer amaranth growing without crop competition produced
highest amounts of biomass and lowest extended flowering pattern. The
Palmer amaranth strategy in bareground was to invest biomass in growing
plant width and height. Nonetheless, Palmer amaranth produced 31\% less
biomass in second cohort compared to first cohort timing. In a
bareground study, early emerged Palmer amaranth without competition was
50\% taller than late emerged plants (Webster and Grey, 2015). These
results suggests that crop competition is not the only factor limiting
late Palmer amaranth establishment. The limited growth of Palmer
amaranth at second cohort is likely a reduced plant response to thermal
units (e.g, growing degree days). It is hypothesize that reduced day
length contributed to smaller plants at second cohort as well as shorter
flowering period. A study in North Carolina and Illinois predicted that
less than 10\% Palmer amaranth seedlings emergence occurred after June
(Piskackova et al., 2021). In addition, Palmer amaranth negative impact
on soybean (Korres et al., 2020) and cotton (Webster and Grey, 2015)
yields was higher when plants were established near to crop planting.

Seed production was not evaluated due to Palmer amaranth harvest at
flowering time. Nonetheless, it is well documented a strong positive
correlation between Palmer amaranth biomass and seed production
(Schwartz et al., 2016; Spaunhorst et al., 2018). I our study, Palmer
amaranth growing at first cohort accumulated an overall 50\% more
biomass when compared to second cohort. Therefore, Palmer amaranth
plants growing in the second cohort is likely to produce less seeds
regardless the agroecossystem. Our observation is consistent with the
findings that first Palmer amaranth cohort produced 50\% more seeds per
plant than Palmer amaranth plants established six weeks later in
bareground (Webster and Grey, 2015). Nonetheless, seed production at
second cohort is likely to replenish the soil seedbank. Seed production
and deposition in the seedbank is a key factor for species perpetuation
(Menges, 1987). Palmer amaranth can produce hundred thousands seeds per
plant (Schwartz et al., 2016; Keeley et al., 1987), and stay viable
buried in the seedbank for at least 36 months (Sosnoskie et al., 2013).

Our study demonstrated the short-term Palmer amaranth plasticity to grow
and develop into cropping-systems. Palmer amaranth management priority
should focus on minimizing Palmer amaranth dispersal into new
geographies. Early-season management programs would have a large
negative effect in Palmer amaranth growth and development. Tactics that
promote crop advantage against Palmer amaranth, including early crop
planting, crop rotation, plant width, preemergence applied herbicide
(Sanctis et al., 2021), and crop residue (e.g.~cover crops) would
minimize the negative impact of Palmer amaranth in agroecossystems.

\hypertarget{disclosureconflict-of-interest-statement}{%
\section*{Disclosure/Conflict-of-Interest
Statement}\label{disclosureconflict-of-interest-statement}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Disclosure/Conflict-of-Interest
Statement}

The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conflict of interest.

\hypertarget{author-contributions}{%
\section*{Author Contributions}\label{author-contributions}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Author Contributions}

RW: designed the experiments; AJ, CP, MB, MO, and SS: conducted the
experiments; MO: analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript; AJ, CP, MB,
MO, SS, and RW: conceptualized the research. All authors reviewed the
manuscript.

\hypertarget{acknowledgments}{%
\section*{Acknowledgments}\label{acknowledgments}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Acknowledgments}

Funding: This work received no specific grant from any funding agency,
commercial, or not-for-profit sectors

\hypertarget{supplemental-data}{%
\section{Supplemental Data}\label{supplemental-data}}

Supplementary Material should be uploaded separately on submission, if
there are Supplementary Figures, please include the caption in the same
file as the figure. LaTeX Supplementary Material templates can be found
in the Frontiers LaTeX folder

\hypertarget{references}{%
\section{References}\label{references}}

A reference list should be automatically created here. However it won't.
Pandoc will place the list of references at the end of the document
instead. There are no convenient solution for now to force Pandoc to do
otherwise. The easiest way to get around this problem is to edit the
LaTeX file created by Pandoc before compiling it again using the
traditional LaTeX commands.

\hypertarget{figures}{%
\section*{Figures}\label{figures}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{Figures}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=160mm,height=100mm]{../data analysis/weather/Figure 1} 

}

\caption{Mean average temperature (C) and montly sum precipitation (mm) at Arlington, WI, Clay Center, NE, Grant, NE, Lincoln, NE and Macomb, IL}\label{fig:Figure-1}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=130mm,height=130mm]{../data analysis/figures/Figure 2} 

}

\caption{Cumulative flowering of Palmer amaranth at first and second transplant timing (A) and day of year of 10, 50, and 90 cumulative flowering at first and second transplant timing (B)}\label{fig:Figure-2}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=130mm,height=70mm]{../data analysis/figures/Figure 3} 

}

\caption{Palmer amaranth biomass (A) and height (B) growing in corn, fallow, and soybean across Arlington, Clay Center, Grant, Lincoln, and Macomb}\label{fig:Figure-3}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}

{\centering \includegraphics[width=70mm,height=70mm]{../data analysis/figures/image} 

}

\caption{Harvest Palmer amaranth plants at 40 days after first transplant timing. From left to right, Palmer amaranth growing in fallow, soybean and corn in Arlington, Wisconsin}\label{fig:Figure-4}
\end{figure}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\begin{CSLReferences}{1}{0}
\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-aulakh2021}{}%
Aulakh, J. S., Chahal, P. S., Kumar, V., Price, A. J., and Guillard, K.
(2021). Multiple herbicide-resistant {Palmer} amaranth ({Amaranthus}
palmeri) in {Connecticut}: Confirmation and response to {POST}
herbicides. \emph{Weed Technology} 35, 457--463.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wet.2021.6}{10.1017/wet.2021.6}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-bagavathiannan2016}{}%
Bagavathiannan, M. V., and Norsworthy, J. K. (2016). Multiple-{Herbicide
Resistance Is Widespread} in {Roadside Palmer Amaranth Populations}.
\emph{PLOS ONE} 11, e0148748.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0148748}{10.1371/journal.pone.0148748}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-bates2015}{}%
Bates, D., MÃ¤chler, M., Bolker, B., and Walker, S. (2015). Fitting
{Linear Mixed}-{Effects Models Using} Lme4. \emph{Journal of Statistical
Software} 67, 1--48.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.18637/jss.v067.i01}{10.18637/jss.v067.i01}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-berger2015}{}%
Berger, S. T., Ferrell, J. A., Rowland, D. L., and Webster, T. M.
(2015). Palmer {Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Competition} for
{Water} in {Cotton}. \emph{Weed Science} 63, 928--935.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/WS-D-15-00062.1}{10.1614/WS-D-15-00062.1}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-bravo2017}{}%
Bravo, W., Leon, R. G., Ferrell, J. A., Mulvaney, M. J., and Wood, C. W.
(2017). Differentiation of {Life}-{History Traits} among {Palmer
Amaranth Populations} ({Amaranthus} palmeri) and {Its Relation} to
{Cropping Systems} and {Glyphosate Sensitivity}. \emph{Weed Science} 65,
339--349.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wsc.2017.14}{10.1017/wsc.2017.14}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-briscoerunquist2019}{}%
Briscoe Runquist, R. D., Lake, T., Tiffin, P., and Moeller, D. A.
(2019). Species distribution models throughout the invasion history of
{Palmer} amaranth predict regions at risk of future invasion and reveal
challenges with modeling rapidly shifting geographic ranges. \emph{Sci
Rep} 9, 2426.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-38054-9}{10.1038/s41598-018-38054-9}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-chahal2021}{}%
Chahal, P. S., Barnes, E. R., and Jhala, A. J. (2021). Emergence pattern
of {Palmer} amaranth ({Amaranthus} palmeri) influenced by tillage
timings and residual herbicides. \emph{Weed Technology} 35, 433--439.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wet.2020.136}{10.1017/wet.2020.136}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-chahal2018}{}%
Chahal, P. S., Irmak, S., Jugulam, M., and Jhala, A. J. (2018).
Evaluating {Effect} of {Degree} of {Water Stress} on {Growth} and
{Fecundity} of {Palmer} amaranth ({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Using Soil
Moisture Sensors}. \emph{Weed Science} 66, 738--745.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wsc.2018.47}{10.1017/wsc.2018.47}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-correndo2021}{}%
Correndo, A. A., Moro Rosso, L. H., and Ciampitti, I. A. (2021).
Retrieving and processing agro-meteorological data from {API}-client
sources using {R} software. \emph{BMC Research Notes} 14, 205.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1186/s13104-021-05622-8}{10.1186/s13104-021-05622-8}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-davis2015}{}%
Davis, A. S., Schutte, B. J., Hager, A. G., and Young, B. G. (2015).
Palmer {Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Damage Niche} in {Illinois
Soybean Is Seed Limited}. \emph{Weed Science} 63, 658--668.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/WS-D-14-00177.1}{10.1614/WS-D-14-00177.1}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-farmer2017}{}%
Farmer, J. A., Webb, E. B., Pierce, R. A., and Bradley, K. W. (2017).
Evaluating the potential for weed seed dispersal based on waterfowl
consumption and seed viability. \emph{Pest Management Science} 73,
2592--2603. doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.4710}{10.1002/ps.4710}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-fox2018}{}%
Fox, J., and Weisberg, S. (2018). \emph{An {R Companion} to {Applied
Regression}}. {SAGE Publications} Available at:
\url{http://books.google.com?id=uPNrDwAAQBAJ}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-garetson2019}{}%
Garetson, R., Singh, V., Singh, S., Dotray, P., and Bagavathiannan, M.
(2019). Distribution of herbicide-resistant {Palmer} amaranth
({Amaranthus} palmeri) in row crop production systems in {Texas}.
\emph{Weed Technology} 33, 355--365.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wet.2019.14}{10.1017/wet.2019.14}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-guo2003}{}%
Guo, P., and Al-Khatib, K. (2003). Temperature effects on germination
and growth of redroot pigweed ({Amaranthus} retroflexus), {Palmer}
amaranth ({A}. Palmeri), and common waterhemp ({A}. rudis). \emph{Weed
Science} 51, 869--875.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/P2002-127}{10.1614/P2002-127}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-hartzler2016}{}%
Hartzler, B., and Anderson, M. (2016). Palmer amaranth: {It}'s here, now
what? 10.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-heap2021}{}%
Heap, I. (2021). Internation {Herbicide}-{Resistant Weed Database}.
Available at: \url{http://www.weedscience.org/Home.aspx} {[}Accessed
July 26, 2021{]}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-hothorn2008}{}%
Hothorn, T., Bretz, F., and Westfall, P. (2008). Simultaneous
{Inference} in {General Parametric Models}. \emph{Biometrical Journal}
50, 346--363.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1002/bimj.200810425}{10.1002/bimj.200810425}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-jha2010}{}%
Jha, P., Norsworthy, J. K., Riley, M. B., and Bridges, W. (2010). Annual
{Changes} in {Temperature} and {Light Requirements} for {Germination} of
{Palmer Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Seeds Retrieved} from {Soil}.
\emph{Weed Science} 58, 426--432.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/WS-D-09-00038.1}{10.1614/WS-D-09-00038.1}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-keeley1987}{}%
Keeley, P. E., Carter, C. H., and Thullen, R. J. (1987). Influence of
{Planting Date} on {Growth} of {Palmer Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri).
\emph{Weed Science} 35, 199--204.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/S0043174500079054}{10.1017/S0043174500079054}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-kistner2018}{}%
Kistner, E. J., and Hatfield, J. L. (2018). Potential {Geographic
Distribution} of {Palmer Amaranth} under {Current} and {Future
Climates}. \emph{Agricultural \& Environmental Letters} 3, 170044.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.2134/ael2017.12.0044}{10.2134/ael2017.12.0044}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-klingaman1994}{}%
Klingaman, T. E., and Oliver, L. R. (1994). Palmer {Amaranth}
({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Interference} in {Soybeans} ({Glycine} max).
\emph{Weed Science} 42, 523--527.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/S0043174500076888}{10.1017/S0043174500076888}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-kohrt2017}{}%
Kohrt, J. R., Sprague, C. L., Nadakuduti, S. S., and Douches, D. (2017).
Confirmation of a {Three}-{Way} ({Glyphosate}, {ALS}, and {Atrazine})
{Herbicide}-{Resistant Population} of {Palmer Amaranth} ({Amaranthus}
palmeri) in {Michigan}. \emph{Weed Science} 65, 327--338.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wsc.2017.2}{10.1017/wsc.2017.2}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-korres2020}{}%
Korres, N. E., Norsworthy, J. K., Mauromoustakos, A., and Williams, M.
M. (2020). Soybean density and {Palmer} amaranth ({Amaranthus} palmeri)
establishment time: Effects on weed biology, crop yield, and economic
returns. \emph{Weed Science} 68, 467--475.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wsc.2020.41}{10.1017/wsc.2020.41}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-kupper2017}{}%
KÃ¼pper, A., Borgato, E. A., Patterson, E. L., Netto, A. G., Nicolai, M.,
Carvalho, S. J. P. de, Nissen, S. J., Gaines, T. A., and Christoffoleti,
P. J. (2017). Multiple {Resistance} to {Glyphosate} and {Acetolactate
Synthase Inhibitors} in {Palmer Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri)
{Identified} in {Brazil}. \emph{Weed Science} 65, 317--326.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wsc.2017.1}{10.1017/wsc.2017.1}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-larran2017}{}%
Larran, A. S., Palmieri, V. E., Perotti, V. E., Lieber, L., Tuesca, D.,
and Permingeat, H. R. (2017). Target-site resistance to acetolactate
synthase ({ALS})-inhibiting herbicides in {Amaranthus} palmeri from
{Argentina}. \emph{Pest Management Science} 73, 2578--2584.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1002/ps.4662}{10.1002/ps.4662}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-lindsay2017}{}%
Lindsay, K., Popp, M., Norsworthy, J., Bagavathiannan, M., Powles, S.,
and Lacoste, M. (2017). {PAM}: {Decision Support} for {Long}-{Term
Palmer Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Control}. \emph{Weed
Technology} 31, 915--927.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wet.2017.69}{10.1017/wet.2017.69}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-maclaren2020}{}%
MacLaren, C., Storkey, J., Menegat, A., Metcalfe, H., and
Dehnen-Schmutz, K. (2020). An ecological future for weed science to
sustain crop production and the environment. {A} review. \emph{Agron.
Sustain. Dev.} 40, 24.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-020-00631-6}{10.1007/s13593-020-00631-6}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-macrae2013}{}%
MacRae, A. W., Webster, T. M., Sosnoskie, L. M., Culpepper, A. S., and
Kichler, J. M. (2013). Cotton {Yield Loss Potential} in {Response} to
{Length} of {Palmer Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Interference}. 17,
6.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-massinga2001}{}%
Massinga, R. A., Currie, R. S., Horak, M. J., and Boyer, J. (2001).
Interference of {Palmer} amaranth in corn. \emph{Weed Science} 49,
202--208.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/0043-1745(2001)049\%5B0202:IOPAIC\%5D2.0.CO;2}{10.1614/0043-1745(2001)049{[}0202:IOPAIC{]}2.0.CO;2}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-matzrafi2021}{}%
Matzrafi, M., Osipitan, O. A., Ohadi, S., and Mesgaran, M. B. (2021).
Under pressure: Maternal effects promote drought tolerance in progeny
seed of {Palmer} amaranth ({Amaranthus} palmeri). \emph{Weed Science}
69, 31--38.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wsc.2020.75}{10.1017/wsc.2020.75}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-menges1987}{}%
Menges, R. M. (1987). Weed {Seed Population Dynamics} during {Six Years}
of {Weed Management Systems} in {Crop Rotations} on {Irrigated Soil}.
\emph{Weed Science} 35, 328--332. Available at:
\url{http://www.jstor.org/stable/4044593}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-milani2021}{}%
Milani, A., Panozzo, S., Farinati, S., Iamonico, D., Sattin, M., Loddo,
D., and Scarabel, L. (2021). Recent {Discovery} of {Amaranthus} palmeri
{S}. {Watson} in {Italy}: {Characterization} of {ALS}-{Resistant
Populations} and {Sensitivity} to {Alternative Herbicides}.
\emph{Sustainability} 13, 7003.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.3390/su13137003}{10.3390/su13137003}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-morgan2001}{}%
Morgan, G. D., Baumann, P. A., and Chandler, J. M. (2001). Competitive
{Impact} of {Palmer Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri) on {Cotton}
({Gossypium} hirsutum) {Development} and {Yield}. \emph{Weed Technology}
15, 408--412.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/0890-037X(2001)015\%5B0408:CIOPAA\%5D2.0.CO;2}{10.1614/0890-037X(2001)015{[}0408:CIOPAA{]}2.0.CO;2}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-oliveira2018}{}%
Oliveira, M. C., Gaines, T. A., Patterson, E. L., Jhala, A. J., Irmak,
S., Amundsen, K., and Knezevic, S. Z. (2018). Interspecific and
intraspecific transference of metabolism-based mesotrione resistance in
dioecious weedy {Amaranthus}. \emph{The Plant Journal} 96, 1051--1063.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.14089}{10.1111/tpj.14089}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-oliveira2021a}{}%
Oliveira, M. C., Giacomini, D. A., Arsenijevic, N., Vieira, G., Tranel,
P. J., and Werle, R. (2021). Distribution and validation of genotypic
and phenotypic glyphosate and {PPO}-inhibitor resistance in {Palmer}
amaranth ({Amaranthus} palmeri) from southwestern {Nebraska}. \emph{Weed
Technology} 35, 65--76.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wet.2020.74}{10.1017/wet.2020.74}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-page2021}{}%
Page, E. R., Nurse, R. E., Meloche, S., Bosveld, K., Grainger, C.,
Obeid, K., Filotas, M., Simard, M.-J., and Laforest, M. (2021). Import
of {Palmer} amaranth ({Amaranthus} palmeri {S}. {Wats}.) Seed with sweet
potato ({Ipomea} batatas ({L}.) {Lam}) slips. \emph{Can. J. Plant Sci.},
CJPS-2020-0321.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1139/CJPS-2020-0321}{10.1139/CJPS-2020-0321}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-piskackova2021}{}%
Piskackova, T. A. R., Reberg-Horton, S. C., Richardson, R. J., Jennings,
K. M., Franca, L., Young, B. G., and Leon, R. G. (2021). Windows of
action for controlling palmer amaranth ({Amaranthus} palmeri) using
emergence and phenology models. \emph{Weed Research} 61, 188--198.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1111/wre.12470}{10.1111/wre.12470}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-price2011}{}%
Price, A. J., Balkcom, K. S., Culpepper, S. A., Kelton, J. A., Nichols,
R. L., and Schomberg, H. (2011). Glyphosate-resistant {Palmer} amaranth:
{A} threat to conservation tillage. \emph{Journal of Soil and Water
Conservation} 66, 265--275.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.2489/jswc.66.4.265}{10.2489/jswc.66.4.265}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ritz2015}{}%
Ritz, C., Baty, F., Streibig, J. C., and Gerhard, D. (2015).
Dose-{Response Analysis Using R}. \emph{PLOS ONE} 10, e0146021.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0146021}{10.1371/journal.pone.0146021}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-sanctis2021}{}%
Sanctis, J. H. S. de, Barnes, E. R., Knezevic, S. Z., Kumar, V., and
Jhala, A. J. (2021). Residual herbicides affect critical time of
{Palmer} amaranth removal in soybean. \emph{Agronomy Journal} 113,
1920--1933.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1002/agj2.20615}{10.1002/agj2.20615}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-sauer1957}{}%
Sauer, J. (1957). Recent {Migration} and {Evolution} of the {Dioecious
Amaranths}. \emph{Evolution} 11, 11--31.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.2307/2405808}{10.2307/2405808}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-sauer1972}{}%
Sauer, J. D. (1972). The dioecious amaranths: A new species name and
major range extensions. \emph{MadroÃ±o} 21, 426--434. Available at:
\url{http://www.jstor.org/stable/41423815}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-schwartz2016}{}%
Schwartz, L. M., Norsworthy, J. K., Young, B. G., Bradley, K. W.,
Kruger, G. R., Davis, V. M., Steckel, L. E., and Walsh, M. J. (2016).
Tall {Waterhemp} ({Amaranthus} tuberculatus) and {Palmer} amaranth
({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Seed Production} and {Retention} at {Soybean
Maturity}. \emph{Weed Technology} 30, 284--290.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/WT-D-15-00130.1}{10.1614/WT-D-15-00130.1}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-scott2011}{}%
Scott, D. (2011). The {Technological Fix Criticisms} and the
{Agricultural Biotechnology Debate}. \emph{J Agric Environ Ethics} 24,
207--226.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1007/s10806-010-9253-7}{10.1007/s10806-010-9253-7}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-sosnoskie2013}{}%
Sosnoskie, L. M., Webster, T. M., and Culpepper, A. S. (2013).
Glyphosate {Resistance Does Not Affect Palmer Amaranth} ({Amaranthus}
palmeri) {Seedbank Longevity}. \emph{Weed Science} 61, 283--288.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/WS-D-12-00111.1}{10.1614/WS-D-12-00111.1}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-spaunhorst2018}{}%
Spaunhorst, D. J., Devkota, P., Johnson, W. G., Smeda, R. J., Meyer, C.
J., and Norsworthy, J. K. (2018). Phenology of {Five Palmer} amaranth
({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Populations Grown} in {Northern Indiana} and
{Arkansas}. \emph{Weed Science} 66, 457--469.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wsc.2018.12}{10.1017/wsc.2018.12}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-wang1992}{}%
Wang, J. L., Klessig, D. F., and Berry, J. O. (1992). Regulation of {C4
Gene Expression} in {Developing Amaranth Leaves}. \emph{The Plant Cell}
4, 173--184.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1105/tpc.4.2.173}{10.1105/tpc.4.2.173}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-ward2013}{}%
Ward, S. M., Webster, T. M., and Steckel, L. E. (2013). Palmer
{Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri): {A Review}. \emph{Weed Technology}
27, 12--27.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/WT-D-12-00113.1}{10.1614/WT-D-12-00113.1}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-webster2015}{}%
Webster, T. M., and Grey, T. L. (2015). Glyphosate-{Resistant Palmer
Amaranth} ({Amaranthus} palmeri) {Morphology}, {Growth}, and {Seed
Production} in {Georgia}. \emph{Weed Science} 63, 264--272.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1614/WS-D-14-00051.1}{10.1614/WS-D-14-00051.1}.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-yu2021}{}%
Yu, E., Blair, S., Hardel, M., Chandler, M., Thiede, D., Cortilet, A.,
Gunsolus, J., and Becker, R. (2021). Timeline of {Palmer} amaranth
({Amaranthus} palmeri) invasion and eradication in {Minnesota}.
\emph{Weed Technology}, 1--31.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1017/wet.2021.32}{10.1017/wet.2021.32}.

\end{CSLReferences}

\end{document}
